.TH "texfind" "1" "April 2004" "ConTeXt" "teTeX" 
.PP 
.SH "NAME" 
texfind \- graphical tool to search for text in TeX input files
.PP 
.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBtexfind\fP  [ \fIOPTION\fP \&.\&.\&.  ]
.PP 
.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
\fBtexfind\fP is a graphical, interactive tool that helps you
searching through TeX input files, including subdirectories, and
allows you to do search/replace tasks using Perl regular
expressions. It opens two windows: One displays the directory
hierarchy and allows to select different search directories. The
second window is used to enter the query and display the results.
.PP
.SH "SEARCHING"
.PP
Enter a search string  in the input box at the top, choose the file
extension (*tex by default) and hit ENTER to start the search. The
results will be displayed below.
.PP
The search string is actually a perl regular expression. This gives
you lots of flexibility. The search-and-replace function also uses
Perl regex syntax, but you can also just use simple strings. Currently
there is no way to save changed files.
.PP 
.SH "MENU" 
.PP 
Use the right mouse button to open a menu. 
.HP
\fBFile\fP : Currently only used to exit the program
.HP
\fBEdit\fP : Copy selections, select or unselect all
.HP
\fBSearch\fP : Open a \fBFind\fP dialog that allows further searching
through the displayed results. The \fBReplace\fP option can be used to
replace single or all occurrences of a string, but currently it is not
possible to change the file.
.PP
\fBView\fP : Select specific lines, and adjust word or character
wrapping.  
.PP
.SH "OPTIONS" 
.HP
\fB\-\-font\fR : specify the font used for the menu. Default is
courier. 
.HP
Other options probably exist - I appreciate input by the program
authors, experienced users or perl geeks.
.HP
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.IP 
\fBperlre\fP(1)
.PP 
.SH "BUGS" 
.PP 
None known\&. Well - the replace function isn't the most useful one.
.PP 
.SH "AUTHOR" 
.PP 
\fBtexfind\fP was written for the ConTeXt package by Hans Hagen and
Ton Otten, PRAGMA\&.
.PP 
This manual page was written by Frank Küster <frank@kuesterei\&.ch>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system\&.  It may be used and modified by
others without contacting the author\&.  Any mistakes or omissions in
the manual page are my fault; inquiries about or corrections to this
manual page should be directed to me (and not to the primary
author)\&.
