.TH getnonfreefonts 1 "October 2005" "TeXLive" "TeXLive"
.SH NAME
getnonfreefonts \- download and install fonts which cannot be
distributed on a CD
.LP
getnonfreefonts-sys \- download and install fonts system\-wide which
cannot be distributed on a CD
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B getnonfreefonts 
.RI
[options] [font]
.LP
.B getnonfreefonts-sys
.RI
[options] [font]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Some font suppliers provided fonts which can be used freely but they
disallow that money is charged for the distribution.  Hence, for
distributions on CD or DVD it is usually impossible to include
these fonts.

.BI getnonfreefonts
is a script which downloads and installs these fonts.  Actually, it
first downloads the program
.BI getfont
from CTAN which is then executed.
.BI getfont
does the real work.  It will be updated occasionally to support more
fonts.

.BI getnonfreefonts
and
.BI getnonfreefonts-sys
are identical except that
.BI getnonfreefonts
installs files to
.RI $TEXMFHOME
while
.BI getnonfreefonts-sys
installs files to
.RI $TEXMFLOCAL
\.

.BI getfont 
will not be installed permanently on your system.  It only
exists while 
.BI getnonfreefonts
is running.  
.BI getnonfreefonts
passes all arguments to
.BI getfont.

If a font is specified, only this font will be installed, otherwise
all supported fonts will be installed.

To get a list of supported fonts, run
.BI getnonfreefonts
.BI --lsfonts

.SH OPTIONS
Only the options evaluated by 
.BI getnonfreefonts
are described here. Run
.BI getnonfreefonts 
.BI --help
to get a complete list.

.TP
.B --ctan=<CTAN-node>
.rg
.B <CTAN-node>
can be either
.B
de
for ftp://ftp.dante.de (Hamburg, Germany),
.B
uk
for ftp://tex.ac.uk (Cambridge, UK),
or
.B us
for ftp://ctan.tug.org (Colchester, VT, US)

The default is ftp://tex.ac.uk.

.TP
.B --afm
.rg
Install AFM files as well.  They are not installed by default.  You do
not need them if you don't know what they are good for.

.TP
.B -n, --noinstall
.rg
Do not install anything.  Useful to check whether fonts are available
which are not installed yet.


.TP
.B --shell
.rg
Run
.BI getnonfreefonts
in a shell.
.BI getfont
can be called directly and will exist on your system until you leave
the shell.  If your internet connection is very slow, you can save some time.
Run
.BI getfont --help
first.


.TP
.B -h, --help
.rg
Get a complete list of options.  This list will be more complete and
more up-to-date than this manual page. 

.SH ENVIRONMENT
If the environt variable 
.BI CTAN 
is set to 
.B ftp://<CTAN-node>
then this will be the default.  The argument is an URL.

.BI Example:
If your 
.BI ~/.profile
contains the line
.BI CTAN=ftp://ftp.dante.de
then this will be the default.
If you are at a university which mirrors CTAN, you can set
.BI CTAN
to this mirror.  It will work only if the mirror has the same
directory structure as CTAN, i.e if the directory
.BI tex-archive
is not omitted.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B getnonfreefonts --help
.rg
Display all options and a list of supported fonts.  Note that the
program
.B getfont
is installed temporarily and executed.  You get more information than
this manual page can provide.

.TP
.B getnonfreefonts
.rg
Install all supported fonts which are not installed yet.

.TP
.B getnonfreefonts utopia
.rg
Install Adobe Utopia if it is not installed yet.

.TP
.B getnonfreefonts --force --afm utopia
.rg
Install Adobe Utopia and the corresponding AFM files even if Utopia is
already installed.

.TP
.B getnonfreefonts --noinstall
.rg
No fonts will be installed.  Instead you are told which fonts are
available and which of them are already installed.

.TP
.B getnonfreefonts --shell
.rg
No fonts are installed.  You'll get an interactive shell where you can
invoke
.BI getfont
manually.  Run
.B getfont --help
first.


.SH BUGS
Please send bug reports to Reinhard Kotucha <reinhard.kotucha@web.de>.
