.\" Copyright 1997-2014 Glyph & Cog, LLC
.TH pdftohtml 1 "28 May 2014"
.SH NAME
pdftohtml \- Portable Document Format (PDF) to HTML converter
(version 3.04)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pdftohtml
[options]
.I PDF-file
.I HTML-dir
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pdftohtml
converts Portable Document Format (PDF) files to HTML.
.PP
Pdftohtml reads the PDF file,
.IR PDF-file ,
and places an HTML file for each page, along with auxiliary images
in the directory,
.IR HTML-dir .
The HTML directory will be created; if it already exists, pdftohtml
will report an error.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
Pdftohtml reads a configuration file at startup.  It first tries to
find the user's private config file, ~/.xpdfrc.  If that doesn't
exist, it looks for a system-wide config file, typically
/usr/local/etc/xpdfrc (but this location can be changed when pdftohtml
is built).  See the
.BR xpdfrc (5)
man page for details.
.SH OPTIONS
Many of the following options can be set with configuration file
commands.  These are listed in square brackets with the description of
the corresponding command line option.
.TP
.BI \-f " number"
Specifies the first page to convert.
.TP
.BI \-l " number"
Specifies the last page to convert.
.TP
.B \-r
Specifies the resolution, in DPI, for background images.  The default
is 150 DPI.
.TP
.BI \-opw " password"
Specify the owner password for the PDF file.  Providing this will
bypass all security restrictions.
.TP
.BI \-upw " password"
Specify the user password for the PDF file.
.TP
.B \-q
Don't print any messages or errors.
.RB "[config file: " errQuiet ]
.TP
.BI \-cfg " config-file"
Read
.I config-file
in place of ~/.xpdfrc or the system-wide config file.
.TP
.B \-v
Print copyright and version information.
.TP
.B \-h
Print usage information.
.RB ( \-help
and
.B \-\-help
are equivalent.)
.SH BUGS
Some PDF files contain fonts whose encodings have been mangled beyond
recognition.  There is no way (short of OCR) to extract text from
these files.
.SH EXIT CODES
The Xpdf tools use the following exit codes:
.TP
0
No error.
.TP
1
Error opening a PDF file.
.TP
2
Error opening an output file.
.TP
3
Error related to PDF permissions.
.TP
99
Other error.
.SH AUTHOR
The pdftohtml software and documentation are copyright 1996-2014 Glyph
& Cog, LLC.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR xpdf (1),
.BR pdftops (1),
.BR pdftotext (1),
.BR pdfinfo (1),
.BR pdffonts (1),
.BR pdfdetach (1),
.BR pdftoppm (1),
.BR pdftopng (1),
.BR pdfimages (1),
.BR xpdfrc (5)
.br
.B http://www.foolabs.com/xpdf/
