\input texinfo
@setfilename texlive.info

@macro TL
@TeX{} Live
@end macro

@setchapternewpage odd
@headings off
@evenheading @thispage @| @| @TL{} @ @ @thischapter
@oddheading @thissection @| @| @thispage
@settitle TeX Live: The xxx

@set version 2014
@set month-year October 2013

@copying
This file documents the @TL{} system, etc.

Copyright @copyright{} 2013, 2014 Karl Berry, Peter Breitenlohner, & Norbert Preining.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries a copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the @TeX{} Users Group.
@end copying

@c Define new indices for commands, filenames, and options.
@defcodeindex cm
@defcodeindex fl
@defcodeindex op

@c Put everything in one index (arbitrarily chosen to be the concept index).
@syncodeindex cm cp
@syncodeindex fl cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex op cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp

@dircategory TeX
@direntry
* TeX Live: (texlive).          The TeX Live distribution.
@end direntry


@titlepage
@title @TL{}
@subtitle for version @value{version}
@subtitle @value{month-year}
@author Karl Berry
@author Peter Breitenlohner
@author Norbert Preining
@author @url{http://tug.org/tex-live}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage


@contents


@ifnottex
@node Top
@top The @TL{} System

This manual documents how to build, install, and use @TL{}.  It corresponds
to version @value{version}, released in @value{month-year}.

@menu
* Introduction::                Overview.

* Build System::                The @TL{} Build System.

* Index::                       General index.
@end menu
@end ifnottex


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex fundamental purpose of @TL{}

This manual corresponds to version @value{version} of the @TL{} system,
released in @value{month-year}.

@section @TL{} Mailing Lists

First, two common kinds of messages which should not go to any TeX Live list:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Package bug reports must go to the package author. @TL{} redistributes what
is on CTAN without changes.

@item
General @TeX{}/@LaTeX{} usage questions should go to one of general help
resources.  The @TL{} lists are for @TL{}  topics specifically.

@end itemize

@noindent The following mailing lists related to @TL{} are hosted on
@file{tug.org}:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@url{tex-live@@tug.org} - bug reports, package requests, license issues, and
general @TL{} discussion of any kind.

@item
@url{tlbuild@@tug.org} - specifically about building the binaries from the
sources included in @TL{}, and additional custom binaries.

@item
@url{tldistro@@tug.org} - specifically about packaging @TL{} for complete OS
distributions.

@item
@url{tldoc@@tug.org} - specifically about the base @TL{} documentation and
its translations.

@item
@url{tlsecurity@@tug.org} - specifically for security-related reports.

@end itemize

@noindent You can (un)subscribe to each or peruse their archives via the web
interfaces listed above.

@include build.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
