.TH MAKEMPY "1" "December 2006" "makempy 1.1" "ConTeXt"
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac
.de EX
.in +3
.nf
.ft CW
..
.de EE
.in -3
.ft R
.fi
..

.SH NAME
makempy \- convert PDF or PostScript text to MetaPost graphics

.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
\fBmakempy\fP \fIfilenam\fP

.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBmakempy\fP takes MetaPost output files (\fI*.mpo\fP) and
translates them to \fI*.mpy\fP files. In order to include text as a
graphic into a file typeset with (Con)TeX(t), you extract the text
from Postscript of PDF files using \fBpdftops\fP(1) and \fBpstoedit\fP(1),
creating a Metapost input file.

This file can then be processed by \fBmakempy\fP. The \fBmakempy\fP
script does its work without user intervention. When it deduces that
there are no changes, it does not do anything; otherwise it reports
its steps and any errors.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.IP "\fB--help\fP" 
print basic usage information
.IP "\fB--silent\fP" 
don't report status messages
.IP "\fB--force\fP"
always process the file (no checksum test)
.IP "\fB--noclean\fP"
don't remove temporary files when finished
.IP "\fB--pdftops\fP"
use \fBpdftops\fP(1), part of the \fBxpdf\fP(1) programs,
to convert PDF to PostScript
.IP "\fB--ghostscript\fP"
use GhostScript (see \fBpdf2ps\fP(1)) to convert PDF to PostScript

.SH "VARIABLES"
.PP
When set, the environment variables GS and GS_PROG will be used to
identify GHOSTSCRIPT.  The names of the other programs that
are used can be set with PDFTOPS and PSTOEDIT.
.HP

.SH "SEE ALSO" 

.PP
\fBmpost\fP(1), \fBmptopdf\fP(1), \fBpstoedit\fP(1), \fBtexexec\fP(1).
.PP
The makempy manual, \fImmakempy.pdf\fP,
available from
.URL "http://www.pragma-ade.com/dir/general/manuals/" "PRAGMA ADE" .
.PP
.URL "http://www.contextgarden.net" "ConTeXt wiki" .

.SH "AUTHOR" 

This manual page was written by Frank K\[:u]ster <frank@kuesterei.ch>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system.  It may be used and modified by
others without contacting the author.
