.TH "TEXFIND" "1" "January 2007" "texfind" "ConTeXt" 
.de URL
\\$2 \(laURL: \\$1 \(ra\\$3
..
.if \n[.g] .mso www.tmac
.de EX
.in +3
.nf
.ft CW
..
.de EE
.in -3
.ft R
.fi
..

.SH "NAME" 
texfind \- graphical tool to search for text in TeX input files

.SH "SYNOPSIS" 
.PP 
\fBtexfind\fP  [ \fIOPTION\fP ...  ]

.SH "DESCRIPTION" 
.PP 
\fBtexfind\fP is a graphical, interactive tool that helps you
searching through TeX input files, including subdirectories, and
allows you to do search/replace tasks using \fBperl\fP(1) regular
expressions. It opens two windows: One displays the directory
hierarchy and allows to select different search directories. The
second window is used to enter the query and display the results.

.SH "SEARCHING"

Enter a search string  in the input box at the top, choose the file
extension (\fItex\fP by default) and hit ENTER to start the search. The
results will be displayed in the rest of the window.

The search string is a perl regular expression (see \fBperlre\fP(1)),
which gives you lots of flexibility. The search-and-replace function
also uses perl regex syntax, but you can also just use simple
strings. Currently there is no way to save changed files.

.SH "MENU" 

Use the right mouse button to open a menu. 
.HP
\fBFile\fP : Currently only used to exit the program
.HP
\fBEdit\fP : Copy selections, select or unselect all
.HP
\fBSearch\fP : Open a \fBFind\fP dialog that allows further searching
through the displayed results. The \fBReplace\fP option can be used to
replace single or all occurrences of a string, but currently it is not
possible to change the file.
.PP
\fBView\fP : Select specific lines, and adjust word or character
wrapping.  

.SH "OPTIONS" 
.HP
\fB\-\-font\fR : specify the font used for the menu. Default is
courier. 
.HP
Other options probably exist.   I appreciate input by the program
authors, experienced users, or Perl geeks.
.HP
.SH "SEE ALSO" 
.PP
\fBperl\fP(1), \fBperlre\fP(1),
.BR texmfstart (1).
.PP
.URL "http://www.contextgarden.net" "ConTeXt wiki" .

.SH "BUGS" 

If the \fItexfind\fP wrapper script is not installed, then you may
have to run \fBtexfind\fP as follows:
.EX
texmfstart texfind.pl \fI[ options ]\fP
.EE
See 
.BR texmfstart (1).

The replace function isn't the most useful one.

.SH "AUTHOR" 

\fBtexfind\fP was written for the ConTeXt package by Hans Hagen and
Ton Otten, PRAGMA.

This manual page was written by Frank K\[:u]ster <frank@kuesterei.ch>
for the Debian GNU/Linux system, and modified by Sanjoy Mahajan
<sanjoy@mit.edu>.  It may be used and modified by
others without contacting the authors.
